## Self Assessment

The coursework for the BS in Computer Science degree program has helped to mold me into a well-rounded software developer by covering the complete process of program creation from start to finish in multiple ways.  Classes ranged from the planning and design of an application in the Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC) to the development of programs required to meet specific use cases.  In the SDLC course, I had the opportunity to learn the Agile methodology by taking on the role of Scrum Master, Product Owner, Tester and Developer to help build a travel booking website along with the necessary planning, designing, documentation and communication that takes place in each role.  This class also compared the Waterfall approach to the Agile approach of development along with the benefits and drawbacks of each one.
	
Each programming course challenged me to create an application to solve a given set of requirements including the analysis, development, testing and documentation that goes along with the process.  These included opportunities to use Java to write a zoo monitoring program, C++ to write a game or create a 3D image using the OpenGL Application Programming Interface (API) and using Python with a MongoDB database and the PyMongo API to create a client/server application.  The documentation for these programs included README files, change logs, in-program comments and docstrings while using class-responsibility-collaboration (CRC) cards, sequence diagrams, flowcharts and pseudocode during the planning and development process.  The testing was performed using Junit tests, Jupyter notebook or manual testing to prepare me to fully test any code that is written.  

This wide range of classes helped me to learn how to analyze a problem to come up with a solution while being limited to a specific language or process.  This expanded my knowledge by not allowing me to work within what I already knew and instead directed me to research how to get the needed functionality in a different way.  While performing this research, I learned how to use each language along with the data structures, functions and libraries that were available to meet the given requirements while considering the speed, memory usage and security of each option.  The final projects for some of these classes including OpenGL, automation testing, and Python and MongoDB with testing with Jupyter notebooks have been posted to GitHub for review at [groberge git](https://github.com/groberge){:target="_blank"}.

Also taught during the program was collaboration between developers using BitBucket and Git.  We were given the opportunity to submit changes to a calculator program and a jukebox program using our own branches and resolving any merge conflicts that occurred.  This class along with the use of GitHub for the Software Design and Engineering enhancement displays the use of strategies for building collaborative environments that enable diverse audiences to support organizational decision making. Additional courses that were taken in the study program covered topics such as process and memory management within Linux, reverse engineering using the GNU Debugger (GDB), and data mining using regression charts.  These taught different aspects of being a software developer to help me to become a more knowledgeable in the field.

The projects that are provided in this ePortfolio have helped to demonstrate my abilities that have grown throughout the degree curriculum.   The code review shows my ability to not only read and analyze a given piece of software but to be able to articulate this analysis clearly and note any bugs or changes that should be made.  Along with the documentation provided for each enhancement category and the objects used in the SDLC class mentioned earlier, this exhibits my ability to design, develop, and deliver professional-quality oral, written and visual communications that are coherent, technically sound, and appropriately adapted to specific audiences and contexts.  The enhancements show my strengths in software design and engineering with differing sets of requirements along with my ability to choose the optimal data structure and algorithm options to meet the specific needs while considering the security risks involved.  The included narrative with each enhancement further demonstrates my proficiency in documenting the functionality of a program and communicating the changes that have been made in the project.  Overall, this complete collection has proven that I am a creative, open-minded and talented software developer who would be a benefit to an employer.
